bjbjLULU JEFFREY BROWN: And now to the Philippines,
a country struggling to cope with its rapidly
growing population.
Tonight's story is part of a new project that
looks at the challenge of feeding the world
in a time of social and environmental change.
It's a NewsHour partnership with the Center
for Investigative Reporting, Homelands Productions
and American Public Media's "Marketplace."
The project is called Food for 9 Billion.
The reporter for tonight's story is Sam Eaton
of Homelands Productions.
SAM EATON, Homelands Productions: The Danajon
double barrier reef off of Bohol Island in
the southern Philippines is one of the richest
marine biodiversity hot spots had the world.
But just a short boat ride away, more than
a million people depend on these fishing grounds
for their food and livelihoods.
Rice may be the staple food of the Philippines,
but fish provide most of the protein and daily
diet.
And as the population of communities like
this one soar, nearly tripling in the last
three decades, the effect on the reef has
been devastating.
Fishermen are resorting to extreme tactics
to boost their declining catch.
NAZARIO AVENIDO, patrol volunteer: We capture
one boat this morning.
SAM EATON: Nazario Avenido and his group of
volunteers operate 24-hour patrols, trying
to protect their local fishing grounds.
Illegal fishing has become rampant.
Many use dynamite or cyanide, indiscriminately
killing everything within their reach.
Avenido has confiscated more than 50 boats
and hundreds of illegal nets in recent years.
Today, he seized this boat.
Its owner, who escaped capture, was using
a banned net that wreaks havoc on spawning
grounds and sensitive corals.
Avenido says the violators aren't bad people.
They're just hungry.
NAZARIO AVENIDO: Because there is no other
solution, especially when they are a very
poor family.
SAM EATON: Poor in a country that has one
of the highest population growth rates in
all of Southeast Asia, every year adding about
two million more mouths to feed.
WALDEN BELLO, Philippines: It's a hell of
a problem.
I think you just need to look at the statistics.
SAM EATON: Congressman Walden Bello says the
Philippines is already beyond its carrying
capacity.
And that's today, with a population just shy
of 100 million people.
WALDEN BELLO: And so the demographers are
really worried because they feel that, most
likely, at the earliest, we'll be stabilizing
at around 200 million in 2080.
SAM EATON: That eventual doubling of the population
presents an existential threat to the Philippines,
especially for the people who depend on its
natural resources for food.
I traveled to a rural fishing village called
Humayhumay to see how the issues of population
growth, food and the environments are connected.
And what I found was surprising.
Jason Bostero and his wife, Crisna, both grew
up in large families typical of this area.
But unlike the generations before them, the
Bosteros made a deliberate choice to have
only two children: James and Cyril Jean, ages
6 and 9.
JASON BOSTERO, Philippines (through translator):
My income is just right to feed us three times
a day.
It's really, really different when you have
a small family.
SAM EATON: That choice to have a smaller family
was motivated by memories of going hungry
as young children.
CRISNA BOSTERO, Philippines (through translator):
In my case, we were really hard-up before.
Sometimes, we would only eat once a day because
we were so poor.
We couldn't go to school.
I did not finish school because there were
just so many of us.
SAM EATON: The reason the Bosteros were able
to have a smaller family is because they could
choose to.
A community-based family planning program
has made birth control options like the pill
accessible and affordable at about 70 cents
a month for the first time in their village.
DR.
JOAN CASTRO, PATH Foundation Philippines:
In villages, we train and identify community-based
distributors like this to be able to sell
pills and condoms any time.
SAM EATON: Dr. Joan Castro started the program
here.
DR.
JOAN CASTRO: And this becomes as easy as buying
soft drinks or matches.
SAM EATON: She's with the PATH Foundation
Philippines, a group funded mostly through
USAID.
And what makes her program unique is its emphasis
on local partners.
DR.
JOAN CASTRO (through translator): Which brand
of birth control pills are you selling more
of?
WOMAN (through translator): Well, they like
the yellow one because it's cheaper.
DR.
JOAN CASTRO (through translator): How much
is it?
MAN (through translator): It used to be 35
pesos.
Then it was 38.
Now it's 41.
DR.
JOAN CASTRO: The idea is to be able to bring
access to the people.
SAM EATON: Access that in remote villages
like Humayhumay was nonexistent before the
PATH Foundation came in.
In just six years since the program was first
established here, family sizes have plummeted
from as many as 12 children to a maximum of
about four today.
This village is one of the PATH Foundation's
longest-running case studies.
And what it's showing is how closely tied
family planning is with environmental conservation
and putting food on the table.
Out on the Danajon double barrier reef, where
Jason Bostero fishes every morning, the shift
to smaller families is already paying dividends.
He and his neighbors have created a marine
preserve to help revive fish stocks.
And it's working.
With smaller families, thinking about future
generations is a luxury fishermen like Bostero
can afford.
JASON BOSTERO (through translator): Family
planning is helpful, because, if you control
the number of your children, you don't need
as many fish to support your family.
If you have many children, it's difficult
to support them.
SAM EATON: Outside of Humayhumay, where birth
control remains largely out of reach, the
struggle to put food on the table from one
day to the next dominates life.
Down the road, the gymnasium in the region's
main town, Ubay, was filled recently with
people waiting to collect government assistance
checks for food.
Many stood in line for up to 12 hours.
For the families gathered here, these checks
are a lifeline, making up for the declining
catch from the sea.
This scene is one that neighboring countries
like Thailand and Indonesia have largely avoided,
thanks to state-sponsored family planning
programs.
But Congressman Walden Bello says, in the
Philippines, any efforts to do the same have
faced stiff resistance.
WALDEN BELLO: What's happening is what we
have witnessed recently, which is a hard-line,
scorched-earth opposition on the part of the
Catholic Church hierarchy to any form of artificial
contraception.
SAM EATON: And in a country that's 80 percent
Catholic, that opposition means something.
For more than a decade, the church's leadership
has rallied against a reproductive health
bill in Congress that would guarantee universal
access to birth control.
Recently, it even threatened the president
with excommunication for supporting the bill.
OSCAR CRUZ, Filipino Archbishop Emeritus:
That's why I say, don't fool with the church,
because she will bury you.
SAM EATON: Filipino Archbishop Emeritus Oscar
Cruz says the key to everyone having enough
food to eat is a question of development,
not population control.
OSCAR CRUZ: Once, I was asked, which would
you prefer, to have less mouths to feed or
to have more food to eat?
And I said, is there a choice there?
Come on, if you have more mouths to feed,
then produce more food to eat, not the other
way around.
SAM EATON: But that challenge to produce more
food is already testing the limits of ecosystems,
both on land and sea.
Today, the Philippines imports more rice than
any other nation on the planet.
And according to the World Bank, every major
species of fish here shows signs of severe
overfishing.
Technological advances have helped boost the
food supply, but they've failed to keep pace
with the Philippine's surging population growth.
Maternity wards like this one at a Manila
hospital are overwhelmed.
Dr. Esmeraldo Ilem heads the hospital's family
planning unit, but spends most of his time
these days with new mothers.
DR.
ESMERALDO ILEM, Philippines: She's only 29
years old.
This is her seventh child.
SAM EATON: According to the Guttmacher Institute,
more than half of all pregnancies in the Philippines
are unintended.
It's the poor who come here for maternity
care.
But if they want to prevent pregnancies, they're
out of luck.
Absent any state funding for birth control,
Dr. Ilem has little to offer.
That's a stark contrast to the Bohol Island
fishing village, Humayhumay, where family
planning is as close as the corner store.
Here, the PATH Foundation Philippines program
has taken on a life of its own.
The project is now fully integrated with the
local government's rural health unit.
DR.
JOAN CASTRO: The vision of the project is
in this community you see more children educated
who are able to become leaders and speak out
for themselves in the future and be able to
become stewards of their own sexuality and
the future environment.
This is the legacy.
SAM EATON: Dr. Castro says success stories
like this one can help overcome traditional
attitudes about birth control.
Jason and Crisna Bostero, both practicing
Catholics, don't see a conflict between their
religious beliefs and family planning.
For them, it's about something much more immediate,
like what kind of future they're going to
pass on to their two children.
CRISNA BOSTERO (through translator): I don't
want them to be like us, just to fish the
sea, just to farm the land.
This is not an easy way to earn a living.
You are exposed to the sun.
It's better if they can finish their courses,
so they can have comfortable lives.
SAM EATON: With both of their children in
school, the Bosteros are hopeful about their
future.
But it's a future that could easily be overwhelmed
by outside forces.
After all, this is only one village in a country
still deadlocked over a family planning law,
in a world that's projected to have nine billion
mouths to feed by the middle of the century.
GWEN IFILL: Sam Eaton's reporting on the Philippines
food story continues tonight on American Public
Media's Marketplace.
Listen to it on your public radio station.
You can also find an interactive map, a timeline,
and many more resources at the Food for 9
Billion website.
There's a link to it on NewsHour.PBS.org.
CREDITS Reporter/Producer: Sam Eaton Camera:
Sam Eaton Editor: Charlotte Buchen Local Fixer:
Carlos Conde Additional Field Translation:
Mercy Butawan Consulting Producer: Stephen
Talbot Series Producer: Cassandra Herrman
Executive Producer, Food for 9 Billion: Sharon
Tiller hic] hic] hic] hic] urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags
PlaceName urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags
PlaceType urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags
City urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags
country-region urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags
place JEFFREY BROWN: And now to the Philippines,
a country struggling to cope with its rapidly
growing population Normal Microsoft Office
Word JEFFREY BROWN: And now to the Philippines,
a country struggling to cope with its rapidly
growing population Title Microsoft Office
Word Document MSWordDoc Word.Document.8